Good evening, everyone, thanks for giving me the opportunity tochat this evening. And hopefully you can see my presentation onthe full screen. Yeah. And so as, as sam said, i'm gonna be looking at the chorlton monitoring network, which was in place for the full year of 2021. And they're looking at the influence of weather, which has a huge impact on air quality. And sam gave a brief background. But my interest in in weather data started when i was studying solar and wind energy about 10 years ago, and it was constantly a topic of discussion amongst everyone where we can get good weather data. And it always involves scouring the internet for little bits and pieces. And, and then was when i started working as an air quality consultant, it frustrates me immensely that the only high quality meteo data available from places like the met office that was charging 600 pounds, but a year's worth of data for one site. And it really limits any kind of analysis you can do with of data. And so this evening if this is changing for you is it? It's still on the first slide. Yeah, that's it, we got it. So quick summary about what i'm gonna talk about this evening, hopefully give a quick overview of how weather affects air pollution and look at where we can get weather data, or where open source and free where how we can join this weather data to our monitoring data. And then look at the influence on the chorlton network. And i was going to talk about mutual normalisation, which is removing the effect of air pollution, sorry, of weather from air pollution and data, which is not as not as hard as you think. But i don't really have time, but um, and then all the analysis i'm going to talk about i've been doing using r, which is a free and open source, programming language. Many of you might have heard of python, and r and python often sort of talked about and in scientific communities. And i only started using r about four years ago. And prior to that i'd never done any programming at all, really. And it comes in r studio, which is dramatically reduces the learning curve. And then the syntax is very stable that some people might have played around with linux. And it can be quite frustrating that you use a bit of code from only a few years ago, and something's changed and it doesn't work anymore, has rarely come across that with r. So you can pretty much google the internet for any topic as a huge community of people all working on things and you can just pinch a bit of code. And the chances are, it will still work. And you can use it. And then these four main packages, tinyverse is for processing data, joining it together and filtering it. Sf, is geospatial and allows us to work with data that's got locations attached to it, which is what you need to do if you're plotting things, etc. And then worldmet and openair. And worldmet has been put together to access meteo data make processing easier and openair is what they used for the plots. And they're both of those been written by a fellow called david carslaw and he's done a lot of work with with defra also he works at the university of york and he really championed reproducible and open access to air pollution data and metrological data. So how does the weather affect air pollution? In there, the first thing most of us think of is wind when we think of weather affecting air pollution and but as a few other parameters, air temperature, solar radiation, which obviously both contribute to the wind, and all three of these affect the boundary layer and boundary layers probably has the biggest influence on air pollution. And i'll go into a bit more detail on it in a moment. And basically, you can summarise the processes that the weather has on air pollution as thermal, mechanical, and chemical. And have a, keep that picture in your mind for a moment, which is a plume from a stack at fawley oil refinery in the new forest. And then this image on the right shows what happens with wind and a stack. And actually emissions from a stack are, at their least had the least impact on the ground when the air is stable, and there's not much wind, as soon as the wind picks up, it washes down and comes to the ground. So actually, stack emissions and also wood burners and things like that, they tend to affect the nearby ground receptors much, much more when it's windy than when it's clear and still, because we often think wind blows pollution away. And so this is an example of how it has the opposite effect. And then another example is if we have vehicles with two buildings, either side, it's often called a street cannon, essentially like a valley of buildings, and street canyons, increased pollution concentrations on the road, regardless of the weather conditions, but as soon as we get a strong wind or any any wind at all, it can form like a cap above the two buildings above the above the row of buildings, the street canyon, and it tracks the end, yeah, recirculates under this cap of wind, and concentrations get get really high. And then the boundary layer is, many of you will know that the low portion atmosphere is called troposphere. And the low low portion of the troposphere is boundary layer. And it's high, it's always changing. And they act like a lid on on our emissions. And it varies from about from a few metres on a foggy day, so you've literally head height to 1000s of kilometres in the desert. And the two main processes that form it are convective and mechanical. Basically, when the sun shines the boundary layer, it raises the boundary layer heights. So the convective mixing impact on the boundary layer. And when i say mixing, i mean think of a think of a stable layer of air just sitting above the ground. And as soon as you get any kind of mixing, that layer rises. That is the layer of the turbulent layer rises. And so convective mixing, driven by the sun, and happens during the day, except when we get what's called inversion, which tends to happen when you get clear windless sky and moist, damp ground and essentially the ground becomes cooler in the air. So instead of the air, the air or the surface of the earth being warmer than higher up, the air surface is cooler than higher up so the air stays where it is. And this is often the conditions that you get when you get fog. And the great smog of 1952 which was caused by inversion with millions of coal fires, steam engines, and coal power stations underneath. Then the mechanical mixing is essentially driven by wind. When it's when it's windy, it goes higher. When it's still it goes lower. And then when you have no wind and no sun, the boundary layer is stable. It's pretty, pretty complex. And that's as detailed i'll go into it. And then the third sort of main impact is chemistry. And so when the sun when you have strong sunlight that drives a lot of the reactions of pollutants with other other pollutants in the air. And basically, as soon as any pollutants is emitted from a source, and it starts to react these elements and the most common in air pollution circles is nox no2, so all vehicles or gas boilers, power stations, they emit nox, which is oxides of nitrogen. And then these oxides of nitrogen and form no, no2, and no3 are mainly no and no2. No is not deemed to be harmful, but no2 is is the one that's of concern. And this is strongly related to ozone. And during the first covid lockdown, because a lot of vehicle emissions stopped, ozone increased, because there was no nox to react with it and take away the extra oxygen to form o3. And, the infographic on the right, that's from the clean air strategy, which has quite a few interesting infographics. But this one was actually caught my attention because i've not really appreciated the impact that vocs have on outdoor air pollution. So essentially vocs flow out of the windows of our houses when we're using cleaning products, and in the and then the sunlight causes them to react, and they can actually form a particular matter. They also ozone itself is a pollutant. And it damages plants as well as damaging those. So essentially, if it weren't for vocs, the reduction in nox during covid, first lockdown would also have seen a reduction in ozone. And then weather data. So there's three main sources of meteo data i'll talk about. And the first one is the national oceanic and atmospheric administration, which is a us agency. But there are 30,000 meteorological sites around the world. And this data is accessible to anyone. And it's a bit tricky to access. So this r package called worldmet was put together and enables hourly weather data, in some cases go right back to around 1930 to be accessed really easily and really quickly. Generally speaking, the data is limited to wind speed, direction, air temperature and humidity. But some sites of rain data and cloud data are interesting some of the cloud data sites. Some of the meteorological sites in the uk are still, cloud data is observed by human, so you're gonna get data from nine to five. And for the for the rest of the day, there's no data. And then, also, i meant to say about this data, it's, it's what's called observation data. And so it's ground based. So it's, obviously it's measured on it's on the ground where we are and where air pollution reactions are happening. And generally, this is the gold standard for air quality analysis you want. You want to have a measuring site at your air quality monitoring station if possible. But in reality, that doesn't happen. And the reality is that very often, the nearest meteorological station can be many 10s of kilometres away. And in addition to that many of the sites are missing data, which proves a problem if you're trying to match it to your pollution data. And then another ground based observation site is the environment agency, which has a series of rain gauges around country. And these are accessible. Ignore the 9000 these logical stations on the slide, that's a mistake. But the environment agency has an api, which allows access for the last year. And they do have data back to 2000. It's a bit of a model to match to the to the data that's available from the api. And i've actually done that the data back to 2010. So if anyone's interested, got rain data for all these sites all way back to 2010. And the environment agency, you also have datasets such as river height and some other parameters, which might be of interest. And then a slightly different source. But potentially one of the one of the richest is the ecmwf, which is based in reading. Generally speaking in my, in my experience, it's only really known about on the continent, and don't seem to be used much in the uk. But it's a it's a grid that covers the entire world. And they've essentially use satellite combined satellite data with the ground observations to call the model. And this model has hourly data goes all the way back to 1970. And the resolutions vary from nine kilometres for some parameters on land to 30 kilometres for the majority of parameters for everywhere, including the ocean. And this can be accessed using ecmwf r package. Although it requires you to register for an api key, and it has a queueing system, which can be quite slow and frustrating to download. The code for all these, for all this data will be available in the github. Some point after this talk, if anyone wants to have a go. And to join, i won't go into detail there. So the air quality data that comes from the sites, you have minute data for no2, ozone, pm1, pm2.5 and pm10. And and that's, that's every minute. And then the metoe data, which comes to manchester airport is every half an hour, but at 20 minutes, past the 10 to the hour. So to try and see if you were to join this in an excel spreadsheet, it would take a long time and be very error prone. And add to that that often you get sections of the time periods where the data is missing, etc. So using the openair time average function to aggregate both datasets to the same time step, which in the case of the analysis i've done is every 10 minutes, it's 10 minute data. And then you can use a left join function from the dplyr package which knits the two together essentially. And yeah the meteo data... The meteo data used for this site is manchester airport, which is nine kilometres away from chorlton as the crow flies, and as you can see the wind roads. So with wind roads, longer arms show stronger and more frequent wind. And so the length of the arm refers to the frequency of the wind and the width and the colour. And the width of the end refers to the strength of the wind. So the wind predominately comes from the south, and what the stronger winds come from the west. But generally speaking, it's south south westerly, the prevailing wind direction for the manchester area. And then to move on to the data. So darley avenue, had a monitoring station from february to august last year. And it was attached to this lamppost, unfortunately it didn't feature on the google street view image which was taken september last year. But i'm assured that this is the location of the of the monitoring site. And then if we plot that for the full time period of that the monitor was logging data, if we match that to the wind data, we can come up with what's called a polar plot and this plot it shows for each points of for each for a particular wind direction and wind speed, it shows you what what the typical concentration would be and you can see my pointer. So for instance, north north westerly wind at five metres per second, so between the six and the four, and we can the average concentration was about just over six micrograms per metre cubed of pm 2.5. And the maximum concentration with the time period was around 12 micrograms per cubic metre, the world health organisation limit for the pm 2.5 is 10 micrograms per metre cubed. And so those the red is, is quite high. But this is a whole period of the monitoring. So we can break it down into well, actually, so put a map first, we give you context as to how this relates to the location. And so it's clear that the majority, and that the concentrations are highest when the wind blows from basically the road and the population so you can see where the houses are on this map, and you can see where the mersey is behind. And if we break it down for different periods of the day, you can see that the highest concentrations seems to come around 8pm and evening, eight, nine to the evening hours. Which i thought maybe means probably relate to wood burning from the residential areas. But ended we can if we split it up by air temperature. So we grouped the wind roses, sorry, the polar plots by when the air temperature was minus four to seven, but it was seven to 11. Actually, the temperature when the air temperature was between seven and 11 degrees, that was when we got the the wind coming from the north northeast, which is where the houses are. And the highest concentrations actually happened when the temperature is 11 to 15 degrees, which comes from the races yes, potentially, those high concentrations happened from their, from the, from the road in the evening. And so whether or not some kind of club that goes on at school or something, not sure. And then if you look at the no2 concentrations, so no2 is a bit more a bit less influenced by wind, and particular matter gets carried by the wind, whereas no two breaks down quite quickly after it's been emitted after it's been formed from the nox from exhaust fumes. And generally speaking for every metre or two away from a road, you go the drop off and no two is quite significant. And which is why cycle paths make a big difference because they increase the distance from cars to buildings where you can see that the highest concentrations are when the wind is low, ie the emissions were next to the monitoring sites, which is the road and generally speaking no2 tends come from road traffic, as opposed to wood burning or other sources, although gas boilers are the second most second highest source of energy to pollution. And but they tend to happen in the backs of people's houses right next to their windows where they sleep. But away from most monitoring sites what's happened next he wrote and then as we break down no to for each hour. And we can see again that these high concentrations happen around 8pm and evening from the north and east. But then also we get some peaks at 7am and 8am maybe related to the school runs and then i've looked at move on to the look at the air temperature for their relationship with no2 and again, nothing nothing that jumps out as really obvious in terms of the sources, but something for people who are local to the area maybe can pick through these graphs and think about what could what could be contributing to these concentrations of different wind speeds. And if you look at the four banks, the monitoring site was right next to natwest just next to the the junction and doing a plot for no2, yeah again doesn't necessarily show anything that's significant except that when the wind is quite strong from the south, it's quite high. It's, that's where you've got wilbraham road, traffic will be influencing the the monitoring site, as well as the traffic on barlow moor road. And on this site, we'll have a look at the effect of the boundary layer height and solar radiation. And so if we get data from the ecmwf for solar radiation, we use a nine kilometre grid, grids yeah nine kilometre grid area, and then for the boundary layer height, we use the 30 kilometre grid and breaking down the concentrations based on their boundary layer height. So if you look at this, it's got ozone on the right and no two on the left. And you can see that the boundary layer height has the opposite effect on both of them. So when the boundary layer height'ss high, ozone is high, and when boundary layer is low, ozone is low. Whereas for no2 a low boundary layer height, means high concentration of now, and vice versa. And and then, and that's because ozone is a largely sun driven pollutant. So high boundary layer, we tend to get a high boundary layer when we, when it's sunny and clear. And we get low boundary layers when it's poor weather conditions. And then have a look at... And then quick look at sandy lane and this monitoring site. And at didn't really show particularly high concentrations until december this year. And when all suddenly got enormous constant and oh two concentrations when the wind was blowing from the southeast. And if you break it down a bit more, you can see how high december was compared to the rest of the time. And actually, the this seems to be happening during the middle of the day. So between 10 and three, which makes me wonder if it's all kind of construction machinery or something, if there's a construction site over the road, or if we go back to the the picture of where it is, it's nell lane is also sort of that direction. But yeah, what's called non-mobile road machinery doesn't have to pass any emission standards. So they tend to be really highly polluting compared especially compared to road cars. So something to maybe think about. But yeah, that's, that's about it.
